Education is one good that almost every American agrees produces a positive impact on the country. Even taxpayers without children recognize the benefits of an educated populace. Thus education is the one good that could be provided in a free market that the government funds for everyone. College is not free for everyone, but the federal government does provide tax benefits to encourage private spending on post-secondary education.

From the IRS's website on tax deductions we find several possible tax benefits. In general these benefits tend to be capped at certain incomes, are not considered deductions that can be swallowed up by the standard deduction, and can actually yield refunds if the tax bill end sup negative. So lower and middle income families actually could benefit from this tax structure. However, the benefits are low compared to the cost of an education.

There is one other method to reduce taxes on education spending and that is the 529 savings plan. These plans are designed to encourage families to save money for education by providing a couple of tax benfits. The first benefit is that many states allow payments into these accounts to be deducted from state income taxes. The second benefit is that any profits from savings invested in 529 accounts are not taxed at all, not even at the lower capital gains rate.

What effect does the existence of 529 savings accounts have on education? Imagine two children born into families that have at least $60,000 to put into a college fund at birth. The first child has parents that have $60,000 saved up but worry that other expenses may crop up over the next 18 years and do not want to pay the withdrawal penalties for non-education expenses. They put the money into a mutual fund intending not to touch it unless there is an emergency. The other child has parents with enough of a financial cushion that they put the $60,000 into the same mutual fund but in a 529 savings account. 

What is the tax benefit for the second child? Over 18 years, adjusted for inflation, the $60,000 will turn into about $150,000 at a decent 5% annual return over inflation. That return creates $90,000 in profit. For the first child with the regular mutual fund, the capital gains tax will take 20% of that to leave about $132,000 in the college fund. The second child will receive the entire $150,000. 

Both families made the long-term decision to invest in education, but the familiy with more money at the beginning was able to take advantage of the tax system and reap not only the gains of the extra money but also save $18,000 in taxes. Families should be able to pass advantages along to the next generation and spending on education is a good thing. However, the government does not need to be creating extra rewards for wealth that serve to excerbate positive feedback cycles that make it harder and harder for families to catch up.

Middle class families may take advantage of 529 accounts, but they typically do so later in a child's life when the capital gains tax benefit is much smaller. They see the visible benefits of a reduced state tax bill and less capital gains to pay, but the costs are hidden. Tuition rises as other families are more willing to pay 15% more. The tax burden is shifted more onto the shoulders of those who wait or have no children or cannot afford to put aside any savings.

Being born into a familiy with parents or grandparents that can fund your education is a benefit and the government needs to be careful about punishing transfers, but the government does not need to make the differences more extreme. 


A 529 savings account is a method to save for education expenses. Money placed in these accounts do not pay capital gains taxes at all. Thus people who have the flexibility to save for college from birth are at an extreme advantage over those who cannot. Thus education costs rise for everyone. Without any ability to catch up, the middle class feels disillusioned and may give up trying.
