Capital gains are taxed at a maximum rate of 20% which is about half the tax burden on other forms of income for high-income individuals. The capital gains rate is lower because it stimulates investment. And the capital gains rate is lower to eliminate double taxation.

A lower capital gains rate stimulates investment in capital that is subject to the lower rate. The government is forced to choose what forms of capital should be stimulated. The free market should be determining where capital flows not the government. 

Capital gains are not double taxed because the corporate tax rate is built into the price of the stock. Ultimately the value of a stock is the cumulative, predicted, time-adjusted value of its dividends. The corporate tax rate reduces the value of those dividends, but the amount is known before purchasing. The value of a stock is the such that the return will be 6% or so to account for the risk. 

The only individuals that might be double taxed are those that create the company (i need to check the math and tax law here). However, they receive the benefit of reduced liability. All transfers of money are taxed. That is how we make taxes fair. Creating an entity to pass money through doubles the number of transfers and thus should be taxed doubly. The reward is limited liability. If the cost of double taxation is too much then an individual need not create a corporation. If they decide the double taxation is a price they are willing to pay then it is fair. 

Regular payroll is double taxed in the same manner as capital gains. Payroll is paid and then the employee must pay a percentage of that. Without corporate taxation, the work would be more valuable and thus incomes higher. So the incidence of two taxes (along with sales taxes and every other transfer) fall at least partially on regular income. Simlarly capital gains for creating a successful corporation can be seen in the same light.

A higher capital gains rate means that losses receive a higher tax deduction. Thus risky investments maintain their valued status.

A progressive tax on capital gains will reward the middle class investors. Smart money will very slowly catch up to dumb money if the tax rates are equivalent. 
