The estate tax is not a mechanism for transferring wealth from rich to poor. The estate tax removes an incentive to wait until death to transfer wealth to your children. Without an estate tax the best way to transfer money without being taxed is to wait until death. Thus people hoard their riches until they pass away, and this hoarding is the least effective means of transfer. Elderly wealthy people do not take the risks, have the knowledge, or spend the time to determine the optimal investments for their capital. They are susceptible to fraud. And even the best planned wills can be contentious when dealing with tens of millions of dollars and dozens of heirs. 

Elizabeth Christ Trump was born in Germany in 1885 and moved to the United States in 1902. She started a real estate business.
Intergenerational wealth can build up without any inheiritence.

A twenty or thirty something has time and energy to build great businesses. Waiting until both parents die when you are in your fifties may be too late to do anything more than travel the world. While a twenty year old with too much money can get into a lot of trouble, they are also capable of things that no one else is. They can become artists without fear of starvation. They can devote themselves to philanthropy, science, or the arts. Or they build businesses that no one else would dare to attempt.

Mitt Romney received help buying a car, house, and education. He could focus on his studies and his ambitions. He did not wait until his parents died to start his business.

There are comparatively fewer examples of people who inheireted money at 55 and turned that money into making a difference. By 55 a person's destiny is set. The economy and country moves forward when people like Donald Trump and Mitt Romney use the family advantages to get an education and then turn a small amount of assistance into a large fortune.


In 1975 Donald Trump received a loan of $1 million from his father. Donald's father, Fred, died in 1999. Regardless of your opinion of the Trump family, Donald spent that million dollars more aggressively and with more care than his father would have. Donald was in his twenties and looking to make his mark on the world, and all he had was that loan. His father's attention was divided amongst a much larger fortune, and he had already made his own mark.


Why should we encourage this less than optimal behavior?

Battles over estates are not good for anyone. People spend time, money, and energy fighting how to divide wealth rather than how to create wealth and that is all wasted.

What about small businesses? Yes, in some very rare cases it is possible that an estate consists almost entirely of a business. But it not in the government's interest to incentivize family businesses. If a child is the best person to run the company then whoever buys the company can hire them. If not, then the government is not causing any harm by encouraging new ownership that is focused purely on profit. Any business should be able to create enough liquidity to pay taxes. A diverse estate is smart and discouraging putting all eggs in one basket is a feature not a bug. 
