There are two reasons to donate to a political campaign. The first is because you believe that a particular candidate is the best in the race.  The second reason is that you want a politician to owe you something. There is nothing wrong with donating for the first reason. In America, every one should be free to donate to candidates that they believe in. However, a donation with a string attached is not a free speech issue and distorts the democratic process.

We must be careful about giving away any freedoms because we think it is for a good reason this time. So, how can we stop the second type of donation without limiting the first type of donation? We need to proactively sacrifice any claims to influence politicians to make politicians no longer beholden to donors. This sacrifice will not matter to small donors who have no influence to begin with.

The real issue with campaign finance is not that one side or group is buying elections, but that the influence of political donations does not grow linearly. A $20 donantion buys no access at all to a politician. So 10,000 people donating $20 each still have no access because 10,000*0=0. One person donating $2000 might be able to get the politician to listen for a few minutes. One hundred $2000 donors will have more influence than 10,000 $20 donors despite donating the same amount in total. And then there is donor who pledges $200,000 to a PAC backing the candidate. The politician will listen to any suggestion they may have regarding policy. It is simply easier to please one person than 100 or 10,000. One person donating 10 million dollars will always have a bigger seat at the table than 10,000 people donating $1000 each, and they in turn will have a bigger seat than 1 million people donating $10 each.

Currently large donors take advantage of this disparity to create a political system that favors themselves. Small donors have negligible power, but this lack of power means that we have nothing to lose by disrupting campaign finance. If we could eliminate the impact that money has on an election then politicians would not be beholden to donors. 

Politicians fundraise because every dollar they raise and spend increases their chances of winning. What if spending money actually decresed their chances of winning? That is exactly what happens if people pledge matching donations instead of unrestricted donations. Imagine you are running for office and a millionaire donates $1 million to your opponent. How much money you spend on your campaign? The best answer is as much money as you can raise. Now, imagine you are running for office and a millionaire promises that he would donate $2 to your opponent for every $1 you spend on your campaign. How much money would you spend? The best answer is $0. In this new scenario the millionaire saves the $1 million donation, but he has much less influence should your opponent win. A millionaire who thinks your opponent is the best person for the job considers this a win-win. He saves money and still gets the right person in office. However, if he doesn't particularly like your opponent but wants a $2 million favor then he loses out.

Small donors do not get favors anyway, so banding together with matching donations will always be a win-win. 
